---
comments: true
---

# Seafaring

## Note
This page of notes is effectively a distillation of a *Mormon Expression* podcast episode, [How to build a transoceanic vessel](https://podcasters.spotify.com/pod/show/mormonexpression/episodes/276-How-to-build-a-transoceanic-vessel-e16pa2t). I've added a few of my own remarks here and there, but shoutout to John Larsen and cohorts for presenting a good majority of the content & observations in this page.

## In the beginning...
[1 Ne 17](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/scriptures/bofm/1-ne/17?lang=eng) is where we find a scriptural account of Nephi being commanded to build a seafaring ship, around 591 BC. Here, I hope to outline some possible problems with this passage.

Consider how many trees it would take to produce a ship. Consider how many sheep it would take to get the fabric for the sails and rope. Consider how any human alive today could build something, anything, **from scratch**. Not buying supplies from Home Depot, not buying components from another retailer. Imagine you, your hands, and the world, being told to make... a skateboard. Something pedestrian. Could you? Even if you knew how, you would be relying on knowledge, innovation and cooperation from other humans. Can you make a tree into a 2x4 length of wood on your own? In theory, yes, given the tools. Could you do it with no tools? 

For Lehi and his family to travel to the promised land from Jerusalem, they necessarily had to travel by sea. What led them to the coast was a Liahona, of curious craftsmanship, that just appeared when they woke up one morning. Other precedents for guiding people like, say, Israelites with Moses in the wilderness, had guidance more like [pillars of cloud or fire](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/scriptures/ot/ex/13?lang=eng&id=p21-p22#p21). I guess Lehi gets a compass. A [conditional compass](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/scriptures/bofm/1-ne/16?lang=eng&id=28-29#p28), no less. No parallels to 19th century right-hand path magic.

If God can do whatever he wants, he could have just as easily had Lehi's family wake up and find a boat ready to go. Or, better yet, they simply wake up in Peru. Those are [[Falsifiability|non-falsifiable]] claims. Could have happened, and we would only be able to marvel at how great God is for being both able and willing to do that. Instead, we have a scriptural account of Nephi being commanded to build a boat. This can be read as a faith-promoting story about God giving us accountability to take matters into our own hands. However, we're also given a timeline for when this is purported to have happened. This is where problems arise.

The setup for this tale is that Lehi's family is [wandering in the wilderness for eight years](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/scriptures/bofm/1-ne/17?lang=eng&id=p4#p4). Presumably not counting times they had to go back to Jerusalem for plates, then for wives. I'll repeat again for emphasis, ==eight years==. In my limited experience of camping, for never more than one week at a time, I find myself very skeptical of the utility of their equipment and supplies. The setup for Lehi's story is that they have nothing. Either it would have worn down, been destroyed, or simply discarded as dead weight. Did they leave Jerusalem with a pickaxe? If they did, is it in useable condition after eight years? Wouldn't someone by year five have thought "what am I hauling this around for?" Am I safe to assume that they didn't expect to need it wherever God is leading them to?

Once they get to the land, which is not the promised land, they call it [Bountiful](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/scriptures/bofm/1-ne/17?lang=eng&id=p5#p5), "because of its much fruit and also wild honey; and all these things were prepared of the Lord that we might not perish." Verses 7-8: After being in Bountiful for several days, Nephi is told to build a ship. Verse 9 is important: 

> **9** And I said: Lord, whither shall I go that I may find ore to molten, that I may make tools to construct the ship after the manner which thou hast shown unto me?
> **10** And it came to pass that the Lord told me whither I should go to find ore, that I might make tools.

Makes sense so far.

> **11** And it came to pass that I, Nephi, did make a bellows wherewith to blow the fire, of the skins of beasts; and after I had made a bellows, that I might have wherewith to blow the fire, I did smite two stones together that I might make fire.

> **16** And it came to pass that I did make tools of the ore which I did molten out of the rock.

It's not explicitly stated what ore this is, but we can rule out some possibilities since it's a transoceanic vessel, being submerged in saltwater for an extended amount of time. Gold, silver, or copper won't do. Iron will. Can we assume it's iron? It's not likely to be any kind of alloy like bronze. 

Nephi doesn't ask "you had us bring a wagon full of tools from Jerusalem, can you tell me how to use them?" instead, he asserts "I need tools to do this job." So, imagine Nephi on this mountain, and is told that there is iron here. How is he going to get the iron out of the mountain? We know that at this point he doesn't have any tools. He know he needs tools to build the boat, and we know he needs tools to get the iron to make the tools to build the boat. How do you mine iron out of a mountain without tools? He says he has no tools! 

The iron isn't exposed to the elements in a seam or a visible vein, since verse 16 explicitly states that Nephi used "the ore which I did molten out of the rock." He also says "molten" back in verse 9. In English, the language to which the Book of Mormon was perfectly translated to, *molten* means to melt iron. This means that Nephi needs a blast furnace. The iron has to be heat treated.

Contemporary technology at the end of the Bronze Age, around 600 BC, was done in a type of furnace called a bloomery. It was capable of making iron soft, but not molten. Amateur-grade metallurgy that you or I could reproduce in our own backyard, from simply burning wood for like a pizza oven, could get upwards of 500 to 1,000 degrees Fahrenheit. That's *almost* hot enough to melt aluminum. Nephi likely didn't make aluminum tools. Nephi would need a furnace to get up to 2,000 degrees to make iron soft, and up to 3,000F degrees to make it molten. In 600 BC. The technology to do that would not exist for another 1,500 years, around 1100 AD. Source: [Construction physics](https://www.construction-physics.com/p/the-blast-furnace-800-years-of-technology), [Britannica](https://www.britannica.com/technology/iron-processing). For reference, here are some [melting points of various metals](https://www.onlinemetals.com/en/melting-points). 

Simply having the blast furnace isn't quite enough, either. Nephi needs fuel to burn. The most useful fuel source in the Sinai Peninsula around 590 BC would be charcoal. That will only get us up to, again, about 1,000 degrees. Humanity couldn't get 3,000 degree furnaces until we started burning coal, which is not available in the Sinai Peninsula around 590 BC. For the quantities of charcoal they would need, Nephi would have had to deforest aces and acres and acres of forest. Nephi's brethren [were "desirous that they might not labor"](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/scriptures/bofm/1-ne/17?lang=eng&id=p18#p18), so we could assume that they weren't helping prepare the wood. Who was chopping the wood? Just to make the charcoal, not counting lumber to build the boat itself. Just the fuel for the furnace, Nephi needs inordinate quantities of charcoal to get the furnace hot enough to build the hammer that he needs to get the iron out of the mountain.

Think back to my earlier mention of building a skateboard from scratch. Milling, assembling, fabricating, etc. all relies on a cumulative buildup of technology. If you were alone in the woods, you don't have a sawmill, nor do you have a supply of nails or screws. Today, a manufacturer can buy volumes of nails/screws, so you can do the assembly. This is relevant now, because Nephi had to create an entire smithy from nothing. That is not impossible, but is absurdly unlikely given the technology in that century. For every piece of timber with which he's making the ship, he'll ostensibly need nails to fix the wood together. Manufacturing nails after 1900 is pretty trivial to do on a mass-production scale. Doing it by hand in 590 BC would take a prohibitively long duration of time, burning through the forest to fuel the fire to molten the iron to make the nails.

Another example of that absurdity is Nephi using bellows for the furnace, be it a bloomery or blast furnace. Did they bring sheep with them? Did they have a supply of leather on them? Tanning leather isn't something you do over a short span of time. Granted, wandering in the desert will get them some good tans on their human bodies- surely they understand the technology and methodology of leather tanning. 

Side note- to an uneducated farm boy in upstate New York, as the church really likes to depict Joseph Smith, this is what he would see happening in a smithy. Is he considering where the fuel comes from? There'd be an entire industry built around supply charcoal and coal to smithies, there'd be tradesmen to build the furnace, the blacksmith would buy a bellows.